---
layout: post
category: review
title: Match Point
director: "Woody Allen"
year: 2005
image: /assets/images/match-point.webp
image-credit: <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/18/arts/television/whats-on-tv-thursday-unfaithful-and-usain-bolt-in-rio.html">DreamWorks</a>
image-alt-text: "Chris (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) is swinging a ping-pong bat with his right arm, demonstrating to Nola (Scarlett Johansson) how to play, whilst holding her around the waist with the other. Meanwhile, she gazes at him seductively."
---

The pseudo-philosophical playbook of Woody Allen's _Match Point_ dictates that life’s transformative successes hinge on chance. Whether one’s ball makes it over the net, so to speak, or bounces defeatedly back at the player. It’s a lesson that reiterates the bitter mantra of the middle and hard-working classes: when keeping score, it's not _what_, but _who_, you know that counts. A world in which one might ‘rather be lucky than good’, and where perching tentatively on the right stoops can twist the handles of rewarding and lucrative doors. Even if this is indeed so, filmmakers and admirers queuing on the once sought-after [Allen's](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/31/movies/woody-allen.html) porch have long since found other, more worthwhile entryways to clamour outside. But, for the sake of this exercise, that is beside the (match) point.

The above tennis metaphor is the apt rule of play for this particular story. The players: another set of affable [husbands and wives](https://www.nytimes.com/1992/09/18/movies/review-film-husbands-and-wives-fact-fiction-it-doesn-t-matter.html) who—seemingly due to sheer boredom—fall haplessly into each others' beds. It's a sturdy and reliable Allen set-up that allows for the typical scrutinising of the formation and disintegration of relationships; the distinction between love and lust, and whether it’s worth relinquishing ambition for true passion. On the side, we receive an outsider’s view of Europe, British society and the supposedly coveted upper class; with glamour and manipulation lifted from _[The Talented Mr. Ripley](https://www.zoedowney.com/the-talented-mr-ripley/)_, _Unfaithful_ and _Cruel Intentions_. It’s also a revisitation of themes from his 1989 release _Crimes and Misdemeanors_. Once again, brutish designs are drawn together whilst worshipping at the altar of wealth and status—the access to which becomes muddled by a [fatal attraction](https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/fatal-attraction-1987) to other people's other halves. In this endeavour, Allen sets out to convey the seductive amorality of Highsmith combined with the sensuality of a late 80s erotic thriller. Notwithstanding clunky exposition and the occasional blundering of a heavy-hand, in this regard, he succeeds.

_Match Point_ sees Allen transposing his typical New York romance-drama to London. An English setting may have more to say about the embedded minutiae of class structure in contemporary society. To its credit, seen through American eyes, _Match Point_ understands the unspoken weight of English social division well enough. Here, malintent is delivered through the slightest of gestures and most benign utterances. It’s an ice-cold step into realism for Allen, forgoing his usual wit and charm—but, for this purpose, it works. (Fellow country-house-thriller director Emerald Fennell would do well to take notes on subtlety and sleight of hand in dishing out modern [takes](https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/saltburn-movie-review-2023) on the subject.)

Jonathan Rhys Meyers trades [kicks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bend_It_Like_Beckham) for a tennis racket to star as Chris Wilton, a skint Irishman trying to make good in London. A once seeded player turned instructor, he positions himself at an ideal vantage point to collide with wealthy clients at a country club. He crosses paths with Tom Hewitt (_Stoker's_ Matthew Goode), an heir to a business fortune. The millennial successor to Tom Ripley, Chris swiftly ingratiates himself with the Hewett family in order to secure his place on the social ladder.

Following after _Ripley_, Chris does some studying of his own. He brushes up on (_The Cambridge Companion to_) Dostoevsky, throwing out literary titbits to reel in future parents-in-law played by Brian Cox and Penelope Wilton. Rather than [jazz](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mT-fOr29OfA&t=1s&ab_channel=TomasvdB), it’s opera that ratifies the bond between Chris and Tom. As is often told, an appreciation of the arts lays down the slippery bridge that allows for class mobility. Chris’ limited access to wealth is irrelevant, his aspirations against modest circumstances: admirable. If he can mime along to ‘[_La_ bloody _Traviata_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_traviata)’, then he could be ‘groomed’ to be one of them. Tom’s sister, Emily Mortimer’s well-meaning but guileless Chloë, is immediately lured in by Chris’ struggle. Sensing her enamoration, he woos her effortlessly. It seems that, in the business of getting ahead, Chris has his game, set and match.

It’s a relief to witness a Woody Allen protagonist who isn’t doing their most earnest impression of the director’s younger, jittery self. Even so, I can't help being reminded of Michael Caine’s neurotic slash pathetically lovesick Elliot in Allen’s earlier feature _Hannah and Her Sisters_. Like Elliot, Chris finds himself love-stricken with a taken woman: Tom’s fiancée, sultry out-of-work actor Nola Rice (Scarlett Johansson). An American divorcée, in the manner of Wallis Simpson, Nola fails to win the approval of the Hewitts. Indeed, while Chris plays tennis, Nola dabbles with ping-pong and resides on the losing side of the social ‘net’. Despite having already gained an ‘in’ with Chloë, Chris’ next move is to seduce Nola. It’s an inexplicable play that could render his final hand overdrawn, but he cannot resist pulling another card from the deck.

It is on this essential, but tiresome, male conflict that _Match Point_ rests: does our protagonist choose wealth, standing and security tethered to a lukewarm coupling, or sacrifice it all for a less fortunate woman who draws him in wordlessly via her sirenesque, sexual magnetism? It's a big ask to sympathise with such a boyish predicament, or the ludicrous final act it unfurls. Still, _Match Point_ is sharper around the edges than Allen’s previous catalogue. It’s a cold and hollow piece, lacking in heart, but perhaps more faithful to life for it. Allen remains skilled in eliciting interest in moneyed mundanity, offering a slice of the everyday that is oftentimes more appealing than that itself. Above all, it’s a chilling exercise in fate, surrendering to the notion that existence has ‘no purpose, no design’—an honest thesis carelessly misapplied to enable its main character’s selfish dealings and conveniently sideline his [culpability](https://www.theguardian.com/film/2023/sep/08/woody-allen-venice-applause-metoo) for them.

The disappointment lingering post- _Match_ is that despite a particular focus on interiors: country estates, flats, offices and galleries—an incidental shoehorning in of the South Bank’s Tate Modern—its shortfall lies in an absence of _interiority_. Offered is a picturesque, one-sided view of prismatic London that, while accurate in its reflection of a cushy pedigree of privileged living, rarely critiques its hollow trappings. Its characters motivations are murky, their emotional leanings unclear. We hardly buy into the specificities of Chris’ affections; desires for Chloë and Nola based merely on the kinds of lives each represent to him—women (once again) reduced to types. And, although surrounded by characters of self-interest, Chris is the emptiest shell of all, deplorable due to his tedious indecisiveness and outward indifference towards all but assets attained. Perhaps the meaningful takeaway here is that the cards one is dealt in life do not have final say on the state of play. But clearly, for Woody Allen, it has become a sport of one man trying to cling onto his racket and serve with it, too.
